One China, once again
Donald Trump grants China¡¯s fervent wish

The ¡°one-China¡± policy is back. Who blinked?


Asia
Feb 13th 2017
MODERATION and careful planning have not exactly been watchwords for the Trump administration so far. But the relationship between China and America seems important enough that, in dealing with it, America¡¯s president has decided (for now) to eschew his usual penchant for shock, awe and improvisation.

During an ¡°extremely cordial¡± phone call with Xi Jinping, his opposite number, on February 9th, Donald Trump agreed to honour his country¡¯s long-standing ¡°one-China policy¡±, according to the White House. It said Mr Trump made this commitment ¡°at the request of President Xi¡±. China regards the policy¡ªwhich it interprets as confirming its sovereign claim to Taiwan¡ªas the basis for its relationship with the United States. Mr Xi had refused to talk to Mr Trump until the American president committed himself to it.

Mr Trump¡¯s decision to reassert what has been his country¡¯s policy for almost 40 years (though the wording of it does not explicitly accept China¡¯s sovereignty over Taiwan) was the culmination of a week of old-fashioned diplomacy far removed from government-by-tweet. On February 3rd Michael Flynn, Mr Trump¡¯s then-national security adviser (who was forced to resign ten days later), telephoned China¡¯s highest-ranking foreign-policy official, Yang Jiechi, to lay the groundwork for the two presidents¡¯ call. The same day, James Mattis, America¡¯s defence secretary, who was visiting Japan, said at a news conference that ¡°at this time, we do not see any need for dramatic military moves at all.¡± China Daily, a state-owned newspaper, decided this remark ¡°dispersed the clouds of war¡±¡ªthough the qualification ¡°at this time¡± will hardly have gone unnoticed in Beijing.
Back in Washington, news leaked out that Rex Tillerson, the secretary of state, had moderated a threat he had made earlier against China¡¯s claims in the South China Sea. At his Senate confirmation hearings, Mr Tillerson had said (in what seemed like a throwaway remark) that China¡¯s ¡°access¡± to islands it had built in that sea was ¡°not going to be allowed¡±. This was widely interpreted as a warning that America would blockade them. But Mr Tillerson¡¯s written answers on the subject were more nuanced, talking only of America being capable of denying access ¡°if a contingency occurs¡±¡ªa rather different sort of threat.

On China policy, therefore, Mr Trump appears to be listening to realists in his administration, not to bomb-throwers such as Peter Navarro, the head of the National Trade Council and the author of a book called ¡°Death by China¡±. To the extent that his reassurance to Mr Xi reduced tension in the world¡¯s most important bilateral relationship, the phone call reflected a certain caution in American foreign policy which augurs better for Asian security.

But China is likely to see it as a victory in a zero-sum game. Mr Trump¡¯s support for the idea of ¡°one China¡± reverses the view he took on December 11th when he told Fox News, ¡°I don¡¯t know why we have to be bound by a one-China policy unless we make a deal with China having to do with other things.¡± It is possible, of course, that Mr Xi has made concessions to Mr Trump that have not been made public (on, say, trade or North Korea). But in the absence of those, it looks as if Mr Trump got nothing in return for taking the one-China policy off the table. He blinked first.

To China¡¯s government, this is likely to confirm that its preferred method of diplomacy works: that of issuing non-negotiable demands and repeating them until other countries come around. China is also likely to see Mr Trump¡¯s about-turn as a sign of American weakness, rather than a resolution of policy uncertainty within his administration. The term ¡°paper tiger¡±, once used by Mao to describe America, has made a striking comeback in Chinese descriptions of Mr Trump. Shi Yinhong, a professor at Renmin University and an adviser to the government, told the New York Times that Mr Trump would be regarded as one, having ¡°lost his first fight¡± with China¡¯s leader.
In contrast to America¡¯ president, Mr Xi seems to bestride the world like a colossus. He was fawned on by politicians and businesspeople at the World Economic Forum in Davos last month. Last year he shrugged off a ruling against China by an international tribunal over claims in the South China Sea and persuaded the presidents of the Philippines and Malaysia to cosy up to his country. Mr Xi has a strong incentive to appear firm in his dealings with foreigners: in the run-up to a leadership reshuffle due by the end of this year, he cannot afford to show any flexibility that opponents might construe as weakness.

But even though Mr Trump has changed his stance towards the one-China policy, this does not necessarily mean he will capitulate to China on other matters, nor that he and Mr Xi will be able to work together constructively. Almost immediately after the call between the two presidents, Japan¡¯s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, got a red-carpet welcome in America, suggesting that Mr Trump sees his country¡¯s alliance with Japan as a sort of counterweight to China. North Korea chose the same moment to carry out its first ballistic-missile test of the Trump presidency, reminding both China and America that the one-China policy is not the only issue confronting them.

The list of security-related disagreements between the two countries is long. They relate to everything from America¡¯s deployment of a missile shield in South Korea, known as THAAD, to Japan¡¯s claim to the Senkaku islands (which the Chinese call the Diaoyu) and freedom of navigation in the South China Sea. Nor is there any sign yet that Mr Trump is preparing to back away from a fight with China over trade, tariffs, market access and the like. His reassuring phone call to Mr Xi is more likely to mark a respite from tensions between America and China than an end to them. 

This article was updated on Feburary 14th to take in news of Mr Flynn¡¯s resignation

